The money machine: how a high-profile corruption investigation fell apart
After a revolution overthrew Ukraine’s disgraced president, Theresa May
promised to help the country’s new leaders recover stolen assets. But the UK’s
After a revolution overthrew Ukraine’s disgraced president, Theresa May
promised to help the country’s new leaders recover stolen assets. But the UK’s
The money machine: how a high-profile corruption investigation fell apart
On 11 March 2014, a London branch of the French bank BNP Paribas received a
request from a Ukrainian lawyer. He asked the bank to close accounts belonging
to his client and transfer their balances to Cyprus.
The accounts contained a mere $23m, and the transaction should have been
routine. But although the amount was unremarkable by the standards of the City,
the times were not. Ukraine had just overthrown its president, Viktor
Yanukovich, and the world was on the lookout for money that Yanukovich and his
Yanukovich was a man whose corruption had to be seen to be believed. The
colossal greed of the president and his cronies beggared the Ukrainian state
and infuriated ordinary citizens. Tens of thousands of people protested in
central Kiev throughout the winter of 2013-14, until Yanukovich fled Ukraine
that February. After the revolution, protesters who broke into his private
residence found vintage cars, ostriches, a drinking den shaped like a galleon.
There were stacks of treasures in the garage; he had had no space left for them
The country’s new government accused its predecessors of stealing $100bn, and
the west – perhaps embarrassed that so much of this money had ended up in its
banks – promised to do what it could to help return it to Ukraine.
At the end of April 2014, London hosted a summit that would – in the words of
then-home secretary Theresa May – “provide practical leadership and assistance
to the Ukrainian government as they identify and recover assets looted under
the Yanukovich regime ... It is the tangible manifestation of our shared
determination to end the culture of impunity, and prevent our open societies
and open economies from being abused by corrupt individuals to launder and hide
Dozens of countries sent representatives to the summit, from the United States
and the United Kingdom down to the tiniest tax havens: Bermuda, Monaco, the
Isle of Man. On the summit’s final afternoon, Britain’s then-attorney general,
Dominic Grieve QC, made a dramatic announcement: the UK had already joined the
fight. A transfer had been flagged as suspicious, and British authorities had
frozen the account and initiated a money-laundering investigation.
“This week the UK’s Serious Fraud Office (SFO) announced that it is
investigating allegations of corruption linked to the Yanukovich regime and has
obtained a court order to restrain assets valued at approximately $23m,” Grieve
told the assembled delegates. “There will be no effective deterrent for
corruption whilst levels of detection of illicit financial flows and recovery
If the frozen $23m was indeed linked to corruption in Ukraine, it would still
be only a fraction of what Yanukovich and his associates had been accused of
embezzling. But the case was intended to send a message – about the west’s
determination to make sure Ukraine could regain what had been stolen, and that
its looters be punished. This pleasingly specific number, $23m, dominated
headlines from the summit, where it was held up as concrete proof that the
rulers of the west were finally helping the rest of the world fight corruption.
“The message is clear,” May said. “We are making it harder than ever for
corrupt regimes or individuals around the world to move, hide and profit from
For decades, hundreds of billions of dollars have vanished from the world’s
poorest countries, finding their way – via the tax and secrecy havens of Europe
, south-east Asia and the Caribbean – into the banking system, real estate and
luxury goods markets of the west. According to the World Bank, between $20bn
and $40bn is stolen each year by public officials from developing countries.
Rich countries returned only $147.2m worth of these assets between 2010 and
2012 – far less than one cent out of every misappropriated dollar. And that may
even understate the scale of the problem. Some lawyers involved in
asset-recovery cases estimate the volume of money embezzled globally at around
$1tn a year, which makes the tiny amount of money recovered look even feebler.
As both a financial centre that launders an estimated £100bn a year and a prime
real estate market for the investors of crooked cash, London has a special
responsibility in the fight against corruption – one that it has rarely
accepted. The 2014 summit – much like David Cameron’s highly publicised global
Anti-Corruption Summit in 2016 – was intended to show Britain’s determination
Instead, the case of the $23m collapsed within a year – when a British judge
ruled that the SFO had built its case on “conjecture and suspicion”, and
ordered the money returned to its owner. This is the story of how a very
high-profile corruption investigation fell apart – and what it means for
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Yanukovich was not the first Ukrainian politician to engage in corruption, but
he was certainly the best at it. In fact, the word corruption is a misleading
one for Ukraine, since it implies a dishonest cancer afflicting an otherwise
healthy organism, whereas in this case it was the other way round. Corruption
was the system, and it metastasised into any parts of the state apparatus that
In the three years after Yanukovich took office in 2010, Ukraine slipped from
an already disastrous 134th on Transparency International’s corruption
perceptions index down to 144th – putting it level with countries such as the
Central African Republic and Nigeria, which are synonymous with shadiness and
mismanagement. But the financial damage that Yanukovich and his predecessors
did to Ukraine is hard to measure in simple numbers. At the time of its
independence in 1991, Ukraine’s economy was almost as large as Poland’s; now,
Yanukovich and his allies controlled the country’s legal system, within which
prosecutors have broad discretionary powers to initiate or block investigations
– providing unlimited opportunities for extortion. They could deny export
licenses, delay tax rebates, inflate medicine prices – and demand bribes in
return. To outside observers, it seemed that the only opposition came from
investigative journalists and activists who revealed the backroom deals that
To frustrate any potential investigations, Ukraine’s rulers became masters of
the offshore world’s network of tax havens. Once money was stolen, it was
invested in European and American assets hidden at the end of intricate chains
of shell companies, registered through tax havens in the Indian Ocean, Europe
and the Caribbean. It is Cyprus, rather than Russia, Germany or America, that
dominates the Ukrainian economy: an astonishing 92% of Ukraine’s outward
investment flowed into the Mediterranean tax haven in 2014.
Former president Viktor Yanukovych and his allies are accused of stealing vast
Former president Viktor Yanukovych and his allies are accused of stealing vast
wealth from the Ukrainian people. Photograph: Stanislav Krasilnikov/TASS
The secrecy of these offshore centres allowed the oligarchs around Yanukovich
to keep the precise details of their deals hidden from the public – but
ordinary Ukrainians knew enough to be angry. If Ukraine’s 2014 revolution was
about any one thing, it was about this corruption. Yanukovich and his allies
had stolen as much as they could; more than they could ever need. And even the
most apolitical citizens could see that infrastructure was rotting, medicines
were scarce, schools were falling apart. The armed forces were so demoralised
by the degeneration of the homeland they were supposed to defend that when
Vladimir Putin invaded Crimea, a Ukrainian admiral defected as soon as Russia
The UK government trumpeted the freezing of the $23m for two reasons. First, it
was meant to be the initial installment of many billions that would eventually
help to rebuild Ukraine. If that sum could be confiscated and returned, perhaps
so too could the hundreds of millions stashed in London, Latvia, Luxembourg,
Liechtenstein and elsewhere. Second, the successful prosecution of a regime
insider would send a message to the world’s kleptocrats: your money isn’t safe
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
The $23m was held in bank accounts at BNP Paribas belonging to two companies,
which were in turn controlled by a Ukrainian politician named Mykola
Zlochevsky. A large man with a shaved head, Zlochevsky wears boxy suits,
dislikes fastening the top button of his shirt, and has been a fixture of
Ukraine’s public life for two decades. In 2013, according to the Ukrainian news
weekly, Focus, which almost certainly understated his fortune, he was Ukraine’s
In 2010, after Yanukovich won the election, Zlochevsky became natural resources
minister. That position gave him oversight of all energy companies operating in
Ukraine, including the country’s largest independent gas company, Burisma. The
potential for a conflict of interest should have been clear, because Zlochevsky
himself controlled Burisma. But there was no public outcry about this, because
almost no one in Ukraine knew about it. Zlochevsky owned his businesses via
Cyprus, a favoured haven for assets unobtrusively controlled by high-ranking
In response to my questions about the freezing of Zlochevsky’s $23m, his London
law firm, Peters & Peters, insisted that their client never benefited
personally from the decisions that he took while in office. “Mr Zlochevsky has
followed the letter and spirit of the law in his role as civil servant and has,
at all times, held himself to the highest moral and ethical standards in his
business dealings and public functions,” Peters & Peters said in a statement.
“Our clients have fallen victim to an entrenched and a cynical programme of
“Mr Zlochevsky’s wealth is not a result of corruption or criminal conduct,” the
law firm told me. “He made his wealth before entering office.”
It is true that Zlochevsky was a wealthy man before 2010. Burisma’s website
makes clear that the periods when it has performed best have consistently
coincided with the high points in its owner’s political career. During a
previous Yanukovich government, in 2003-5, Zlochevsky chaired the State
Committee for Natural Resources, and companies under his control won licenses
to explore for oil. Then Yanukovich fell from grace, and the new government
tried to strip Zlochevsky’s companies of their oil exploration rights – and he
had to sue the government in order to keep them. Yanukovich won the presidency
in 2010 and Zlochevsky became a minister. The good times returned: Burisma
gained nine production licenses and its annual production rose sevenfold. After
the revolution, Zlochevsky left the administration.
According to a court judgment from January 2015, the $23m in the account that
had been frozen in London was the proceeds of the sale of an oil storage
facility, which Zlochevsky had owned via a shell company in the British Virgin
Islands, a tax haven that does not reveal who controls the many thousands of
companies based there. The $23m arrived in London from Latvia, a minimally
regulated Eastern European country, where banks are famously welcoming towards
On 14 April 2014, the money was frozen at a special court hearing in London
requested by the Serious Fraud Office. As described in the later court
judgment, the SFO argued that “there were reasonable grounds to believe that
the defendant [Zlochevsky] had engaged in criminal conduct in Ukraine and the
funds in the BNP account were believed to be the proceeds of such criminal
The SFO investigator Richard Gould claimed in the April 2014 court hearing that
Zlochevsky’s dual position in Ukraine as both a politician and a businessman
gave “rise to a clear inference of a wilful and dishonest exploitation of a
direct conflict of interest by a man holding an important public office such as
to amount to an abuse of the public’s trust in him”.
The SFO further argued that “the complicated pattern of offshore holding
companies established when he was still a serving minister was effectively to
conceal his beneficial ownership of Burisma”, which it deemed inherently
By 20 May 2014, Gould had obtained 6,170 electronic documents from BNP Paribas
related to Zlochevsky’s money, and assembled a special team to examine them. He
also wanted evidence from Ukraine, so he wrote to the head of the international
department of the general prosecutors’ office, Vitaly Kasko, in Kiev.
A lean man with a sharp chin and luxuriant head of black hair, Kasko had been
invited into the prosecutor’s office after the revolution, and made responsible
for negotiations with all the western countries that had promised to help at
the London summit. He had previously served as a prosecutor, but quit when
Yanukovich came to power in 2010 – this ensured that Kasko was personally
untainted by corruption. He was also popular with activists, since he provided
legal support for protesters dragged before Yanukovich’s courts during the
Ukraine was at the time in a state of turmoil. Russia had annexed the peninsula
of Crimea, and was aiding pro-Russian rebels in Ukraine’s eastern provinces.
Kiev had lost control of Donetsk and Luhansk, two of the country’s most
important cities, and protesters’ barricades still dominated the centre of the
capital. The country needed a new president and, that May, elected a magnate
named Petro Poroshenko. Although he had served as a minister under Yanukovich
and was himself a billionaire, Poroshenko pledged to sell his confectionery
business, to govern only in the interests of the people, to prosecute the
corrupt former insiders and to bring an end to the old way of doing things,
including in the prosecutors’ office. For too long, prosecutors had been acting
essentially as gangsters in uniform, rather than investigating crimes.
Considering how central prosecutors had been to Yanukovich’s corrupt regime,
there were significant doubts over both the honesty, and competence of
Ukraine’s lawmen, but Kasko was hopeful that his colleagues would see the
importance of regaining the $23m and thus do all they could to help the SFO. He
told me that he translated the British request, sent it to his boss, and
“The investigation began but, no matter how much we pushed the investigators,
it was not effective,” Kasko told me. Even when Zlochevsky’s lawyers announced
they would contest the freezing of the $23m in a London court, the Ukrainian
prosecutors still failed to send the SFO the evidence it needed to maintain the
freezing order. “First the British wrote to me, then the Americans, with
questions about what was happening with the investigation,” Kasko remembered.
It was hardly the mutual trust and cooperation supposedly created by the London
summit. US and British diplomats were begging Ukraine to investigate a case,
which, if it were successful, would benefit Ukraine, and yet nothing appeared
to be happening. Eventually, six months after Gould first wrote to him, Kasko
stepped decisively outside his area of responsibility, and wrote to his boss in
“I said I wanted this to be investigated properly, that the Brits be told about
it, and they get what they wanted,” recalled Kasko. “He said, ‘If you want, get
on with it.’” It was hardly the most enthusiastic of endorsements, but it was
enough for Kasko. He forced investigators to work evenings, and weekends. They
put together a dossier of evidence that Kasko felt supported the SFO’s argument
“that the defendant’s assets were the product of criminal wrongdoing when he
held public office”, sent it to the SFO, and announced officially that
Zlochevsky was suspected of a criminal offence in Ukraine.
It was only thanks to Kasko that the SFO had received any useful documents from
Ukraine at all. “I asked the Brits, ‘What else do we need to do?’” Kasko
remembered. “And they said: ‘That’s fine, that’s more than enough to defend the
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Their confidence was misplaced. In January 2015, Mr Justice Nicholas Blake,
sitting in the Old Bailey, rejected the SFO’s argument. “The case remains a
matter of conjecture and suspicion,” he wrote in his judgment. To confiscate
assets, prosecutors have to prove that the frozen money related to a specific
crime and, he ruled, the SFO had totally failed to do so.
It was a humiliating reverse for British law enforcement, and for Gould, the
lead investigator, who then moved to another agency. (Gould told me in July
2015 that he was “personally disappointed”, but declined to comment further.)
The judge unfroze the $23m and handed it back to Zlochevsky.
The British government had made a big announcement of the original decision to
seize the funds, but did not publicise this reversal. It is not hard to
understand why. It was, after all, an embarrassing setback for the UK, which
had held up this particular case as a sign of its commitment to confiscate
money belonging to Yanukovich’s allies and return it to the people of Ukraine.
When I contacted the SFO in May 2015, a spokeswoman told me: “We are
disappointed we were not provided with the evidence by authorities in the
Ukraine necessary to keep this restraint order in place”, but declined to
comment further because she said the investigation was ongoing. In January of
this year, I contacted Dominic Grieve, who had made the dramatic announcement
of the asset freezing. He is still an MP, but no longer in the government. He
Zlochevsky’s lawyers at Peters & Peters told me that the judge had “ruled
unequivocally that there was not reasonable grounds to allege that our client
had benefited from any criminal conduct”. Burisma’s lawyers have since
repeatedly referred to the ruling as evidence of their client’s vindication,
which calls into question the decision of the UK government to use this
particular case as an example of its determination to recover assets and return
them to Ukraine, when it had been unable to prove that there were sufficient
When Kasko read the judge’s ruling, he had questions, but of a rather different
nature. At the hearing, the tycoon’s lawyers had not just attacked the case
against their client, but also produced evidence of his innocence, evidence
that came from the unlikeliest of sources. Justice Blake’s 21-page judgment
made reference half a dozen times to a letter, dated 2 December 2014, signed by
someone in the Ukrainian prosecutor’s office, which stated baldly that
Anti-government protests in Kiev, on 25 January 2014
Anti-government protests in Kiev, on 25 January 2014. Photograph: Arturas
Kasko felt this was bizarre. Everyone in a senior position at the prosecutor’s
office must have known he was leading a frenzied investigation into Zlochevsky
at that precise time, so how could anyone have signed off on a letter saying
that no investigation was going on? The letter appeared to be crucial to the
judge’s ruling, which stated that Zlochevsky “was never named as a suspect for
embezzlement or indeed any other offence, let alone one related to the exercise
of improper influence in the grant of exploration and production licenses”.
As Kasko saw it, his colleagues had failed to help him when he begged them to
investigate Zlochevsky. But when it came to writing a letter to help the
According to Kasko, there were really only three possible reasons for why a
senior Ukrainian prosecutor would have written a letter for Zlochevsky rather
than assisting Kasko. He was either incompetent, corrupt or both. Peters &
Peters did not respond to specific questions about the letter (“the allegations
implied by your questions … are untrue and entirely without foundation”).
Whatever the explanation for this mysterious letter, the case highlighted a
crucial flaw in countries’ efforts to cooperate across borders. Even in the
rare cases when the UK does freeze a foreign official’s property, it is
dependent for evidence from colleagues abroad who usually have fewer resources,
less training and a decades-long tradition of institutionalised corruption.
That means that any misconduct or incompetence by the Ukrainian prosecutors can
undermine a case in the UK as surely as if the same actions were committed by
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
Zlochevsky is not the only former Ukrainian official to have assets frozen
abroad. As part of western assistance to the new Ukrainian government, European
countries have blocked the assets of Yanukovich and a couple of dozen others.
The asset freeze was intended to give Ukrainian prosecutors time to investigate
and prosecute, and thus prevent the individuals involved burying assets in
their favourite tax havens. The totals involved – around £220m in cash and
property – would buy a lot of medicine and build a lot of roads.
The man in Ukraine responsible for gathering the evidence against many of the
individuals whose assets have been frozen abroad is Sergei Gorbatyuk, head of
the prosecutors’ special investigations department. When we met in April last
year, he looked tired and crumpled in a baggy grey suit; it was late in the
evening, the only time he had free after a long day. Unusually for a
high-ranking official in the prosecutors’ office, he has a reputation for
honesty, which is why several anti-corruption activists recommended that I talk
“Our main problem is that these high-ranking officials’ assets are all
registered abroad, in Monaco, or Cyprus, or Belize, or the British Virgin
Islands, and so on, and we write requests to them, we wait for three or four
years, or there’s no response at all. And that’s that, and it all falls apart,”
he said. “The asset has been re-registered five times just while we’re waiting
Even when foreign officials did reply to his letters, Gorbatyuk explained, he
then had to find a way to understand what they had written. The authorities in
Monaco for example had forwarded him 4,000 pages of documentation relating to
one oligarch in French, Arabic and English, which he had received eight months
previously but was yet to read. The official translators had waited for four
months to tell him they were too busy to do the job, then an outside contractor
proved incapable of managing it, and, he says, his bosses kept blocking the
other suggestions he brought them. “This is the insanity of our whole system,
this is everywhere. I get the impression no one wants anything to happen,” he
And if previous cases are any guide, progress will continue to be slow. In one
of the few examples of a Ukrainian corruption-related charge that has gone to
court, ex-Prime Minister Pavlo Lazarenko was found guilty in California in 2004
of money laundering, and sentenced to 97 months in prison. Lazarenko had fled
Ukraine back in 1999, when he fell out of favour with the then-president. He
tried to claim asylum in the United States but instead became the first foreign
leader convicted of laundering money through the American financial system.
Although the conviction was successful, the asset recovery process remains
blocked. A total of $271m of Lazarenko’s money is frozen in Guernsey, Antigua,
Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Lithuania, but Washington has been unable to
recover it for a decade. And this is not an unusual case. The World Bank has an
asset recovery database, which shows that cases have dragged on in western
courts for more than 10 years in connection to money from Liberia, El Salvador,
Kenya, Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Philippines, Zambia and elsewhere.
In evidence submitted to a parliamentary committee last year, the Serious Fraud
Office said the obstacles put in its path by offshore jurisdictions were a key
cause of these delays. “Top tier defendants are highly sophisticated and
operate internationally. They are likely to be acutely aware of those
jurisdictions with an environment that is favourable to them, and from which it
is very difficult (and in some cases impossible) to either trace benefit or
recover assets,” the SFO said. “Such defendants are also likely to be astute in
their use of financial products and other devices which they use to disguise
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
On 8 March 2015, David Sakvarelidze, then Ukraine’s first deputy general
prosecutor, appeared on a Ukrainian news programme and made a dramatic
accusation – that Ukrainian prosecutors had taken a bribe to help Zlochevsky.
The source for Sakvarelidze’s claim was an unnamed foreign consultant working
within Ukrainian law enforcement. “A high-ranking official in the prosecutors’
office told him [the consultant] he suspected that one official had taken a
bribe of $7m,” Sakvarelidze alleged in his television appearance. “It’s
shameful of course. People like that should not represent this country.”
(Sakvarelidze did not respond to interview requests. The allegation has not
been proven, but it is the subject of an investigation by the newly established
Sakvarelidze, an ethnic Georgian, had been hired just weeks earlier to help
clean up the law enforcement system and he set to work. Progress was slow,
however. In fact, it was so slow that the US ambassador to Ukraine, Geoffrey
Pyatt, decided to make an astonishingly forthright interjection. In September
2015, speaking in the southern Ukrainian city of Odessa, Pyatt stated that
prosecutors “were asked by the UK to send documents supporting the seizure” of
the $23m, but “instead sent letters to Zlochevsky’s attorneys attesting there
was no case against him”. “Those responsible for subverting the case by
authorising those letters should – at a minimum – be summarily terminated,” he
The allegation was part of a long and damning speech, in which he laid out just
how little Ukraine had reformed its law enforcement bodies, something that
makes recovering the millions stashed overseas unlikely if not impossible.
Ukraine’s national finances are currently dependent on the International
Monetary Fund, where the dominant voice belongs to the United States. Pyatt was
not just any ambassador therefore, but the local representative of the
government’s paymaster. He was putting Ukraine on notice – sort out the
prosecutor’s office, because America is getting annoyed. But it didn’t work.
Rival prosecutors opened criminal cases against two of Kasko’s investigators,
and their allies in other institutions. “Sadly, the protection racket we
uncovered … turned out to be just the tip of the iceberg,” Sakvarelidze wrote
Change could only be won when international lenders forced President Poroshenko
to act. It was tough talk from the west that obliged Ukraine’s parliament –
long referred to sarcastically as the biggest business club in Europe – to
create the anti-corruption bureau and a dedicated anti-corruption prosecution
service. And it was only the bluntest of language from US officials that forced
the Ukrainian government to fire crooked prosecutors. According to a
valedictory interview by the former vice president Joe Biden in the Atlantic,
Poroshenko only sacked the lawman blocking Kasko’s reforms because Biden made a
direct threat. “Petro, you’re not getting your billion dollars,” Biden said he
had told Ukraine’s president. “You can keep the [prosecutor] general. Just
Biden was Washington’s point man on Ukraine throughout the Obama
administration, and consistently encouraged reformers and chided their
opponents. In a speech in Ukraine’s parliament in December 2015, he said the
country could not hope to reform itself on European lines or regain its money,
if it did not do something about its entrenched corruption. “You cannot name me
a single democracy in the world where the cancer of corruption is prevalent,”
he told parliament. “It’s not enough to set up a new anti-corruption bureau and
establish a special prosecutor fighting corruption. The Office of the General
By then, however, almost two years had passed since the revolution and many
Ukrainians had become disillusioned. The credibility of the United States was
not helped by the news that since May 2014, Biden’s son Hunter had been on the
board of directors of Burisma, Zlochevsky’s company.
The White House insisted the position was a private matter for Hunter Biden,
and unrelated to his father’s job, but that is not how anyone I spoke to in
Ukraine interpreted it. Hunter Biden is an undistinguished corporate lawyer,
with no previous Ukraine experience. Why would a Ukrainian tycoon hire him?
Hunter Biden failed to reply to questions I sent him, but he told the Wall
Street Journal in December 2015 that he had joined Burisma “to strengthen
corporate governance and transparency at a company working to advance energy
security”. That was not an explanation that many people found reassuring. The
Washington Post was particularly damning: “The appointment of the vice
president’s son to a Ukrainian oil board looks nepotistic at best, nefarious at
worst,” it wrote, shortly after Hunter Biden’s appointment. “You have to wonder
how big the salary has to be to put US soft power at risk like this. Pretty
━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━
In September last year, a court in Kiev cancelled the arrest warrant against
Zlochevsky, ruling that prosecutors had failed to make any progress in their
investigation. That same month, the Latvian media reported that Ukraine had not
helped a police investigation into money laundering, so 50m frozen euros had
passed into the Latvian state budget instead of being returned to Ukraine.
“I get the impression our foreign partners are disappointed by our failure to
make progress tackling corruption, and that’s why they are paying us less
attention,” said Kasko, who is now back in private practice, as he was during
the Yanukovich years. Meanwhile, President Poroshenko’s approval rating is
stuck in the low teens. He has failed to fulfil his promise to sell off his
business empire, and was revealed in the Panama Papers leaks to be still
engaged in structuring his assets offshore. His London law firm has recently
been sending out threatening letters to journalists tempted to repeat
accusations of corruption levelled at him by a former insider who has fled to
Theresa May and US attorney general Eric Holder (left) at the Ukraine Forum on
Theresa May and US attorney general Eric Holder (left) at the Ukraine Forum on
Kasko resigned on 15 February last year, accusing the prosecutor’s office of
being a “hotbed of corruption”. Sakvarelidze was sacked a month later and
charged with a “gross violation of the rules of prosecutorial ethics”. The
whole reforming team came and went, without jailing anyone or recovering a
single oligarch’s foreign fortune. Kasko told me he had resigned because he saw
no point in waiting around impotently while his superiors undermined his cases.
“I didn’t want to stay there like the Queen of England and watch,” he said.
“The biggest problem in the prosecutor’s office is corruption. Sakvarelidze and
I went in to fight against it, and they threw us out.”
Last year, Kasko’s successor formally apologised to the SFO on behalf of the
Ukrainian prosecutor’s office for its role in the failure of the case of the
All in all, the UK chose an unfortunate way to demonstrate “a strong commitment
to the people of Ukraine”, as Theresa May stated in April 2014. But this
unseemly episode highlights many of the reasons why so little of the cash
stolen from poor countries is ever returned to them. Money can flow unhindered
between countries, but police officers cannot, so it is always more difficult
At the start of each year, Ukraine budgets for the money it plans to reclaim
from its deposed rulers, and at the end of the year activists from the
Anti-Corruption Action Centre (an NGO that oversees recruitment of Ukraine’s
new anti-corruption detectives) calculate how much of that money prosecutors
In the first nine months of 2016, the government intended to confiscate £250m.
They actually retrieved just £4,500 – 0.0018% of the planned total.
They are not alone in struggling to get a grip on fraud. In its report to
parliament last year, the SFO said it was failing to retain key investigators
in the face of competition from banks, private investigators and other
well-resourced City companies, something that complicates already tricky cases.
If even the SFO considers itself under-resourced and out-gunned in the battle
against the kleptocrats and their offshore empires, then the problem is still
more severe in Ukraine. Things are likely to get worse as the window of
opportunity provided by enthusiastic foreign assistance is closing fast. Joe
Biden is gone now from the White House (although Hunter remains on the Burisma
board), and Pyatt has left Kiev for a new ambassadorial posting.
With Donald Trump in power, the tiresome American pressure for reform in
Ukraine may well be a thing of the past. Among European allies, France and
Germany have elections this year and thus other things to worry about, as of
course does post-Brexit Britain. When I sought comments on what the government
was now doing to help Ukraine regain its assets, I was batted back and forth
between the Home Office and the Foreign Office for a few days, before they
eventually provided a joint statement sourced to a “government spokesperson”,
confirming that Britain was committed to everything it has always been
“The UK is a strong supporter of the Ukrainian government’s reform process, and
in particular the fight against corruption, which needs to proceed quickly,”
they said, by email. That is undoubtedly true, but sadly the global situation
Ukrainian politicians have consistently failed to keep their resolutions
without foreign governments stiffening their resolve and, with that pressure
fading away, there will now be little to stop them returning to their old ways.
The old oligarchs appear to be feeling as secure as they have done for a while,
and Ukrainians who have long been on the defensive are reaching out for new
On 19 January, the day before Trump’s inauguration, Zlochevsky’s gas company
announced it was becoming a funder of the Atlantic Council, a prominent
Washington thinktank. The Atlantic Council declined to say exactly how much
money the tycoon had offered, only that his donation had been between $100,000
and $249,000. A month later, Burisma hired a new director. Joseph Cofer Black
does not appear to have any more experience of Ukraine than his colleague
Hunter Biden but – as an ex-ambassador and a former director of the CIA’s
counterterrorism centre under George W Bush – he is likely to have lots of
Zlochevsky’s last public appearance was in June 2016 at a Burisma-organised
alternative energy forum, co-hosted in Monaco by Prince Albert II, who made the
keynote speech. Photographs of the event showed Hunter Biden posing with
various comfortably retired ex-politicians, wearing a blue suit twinned with
highly-polished brown shoes. Zlochevsky was tanned and healthy in an
open-necked shirt, while a more formally dressed Prince Albert placed a
Support for this article was provided by a grant from the Pulitzer Center on
• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, or sign up to the long read
© 2017 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies.
