  • [                    ] [SUBMIT] What term do you want to search?
  • switch to the US edition switch to the AU edition switch to the INT edition
DeepMind's AlphaGo to play on team with humans and to challenge five at once
After its game-playing AI beat the best human, Google subsidiary plans to test
The broadcast of the Google DeepMind Challenge Match between AlphaGo and South
[ ] The broadcast of the Google DeepMind Challenge Match between AlphaGo and
South Korean professional Lee Sedol. Photograph: Ahn Young-joon/AP
DeepMind's AlphaGo to play on team with humans and to challenge five at once
After its game-playing AI beat the best human, Google subsidiary plans to test
Monday 10 April 2017 15.53 BST First published on Monday 10 April 2017 
A year on from its victory over Go star Lee Sedol, Google DeepMind is preparing
a “festival” of exhibition matches for its board game-playing AI, AlphaGo, to
Headlining the event will be a one-on-one match against the current number one
player of the ancient Asian game, 19-year-old Chinese professional Ke Jie.
DeepMind has had its eye on this match since even before AlphaGo beat Lee. On
the eve of his trip to Seoul in March 2016, the company’s co-founder, Demis
Hassabis, told the Guardian: “There’s a young kid in China who’s very, very
As well as the one-on-one match with Jie, which will be played over the course
of three games, AlphaGo will take part in two other games with slightly odder
One, “Pair Go”, will see two human Go professionals play against each other,
each partnered up with their own iteration of AlphaGo. The human and AI players
will alternate, with each having to learn from, and adapt to, the moves played
Pair Go is similar to the concept of Advanced Chess, a new form of chess that
was created after the defeat of Garry Kasparov at the hands of IBM’s Deep Blue
in 1997. Advanced Chess players work with a chess computer alongside them,
using the machines as consultants to improve their play. The best Advanced
Chess players tend to be better than both the best human players and the best
solo chess machines, suggesting that human ingenuity still has something to add
to the brute-force approach of the chess machines.
The other new format is Team Go, a more traditional “humanity vs the machines”
setup that will involve a five-player team made up of China’s top Go players
taking AlphaGo head-on. It may seem like showboating, but the match will be
useful for answering a question raised by AlphaGo’s first victory: how good can
anything, man or machine, get at playing Go? Are the best players and the best
AIs already near to perfection, or is there a vast amount of improvement still
DeepMind says both new formats have been created to try and see whether AlphaGo
can be encouraged to show the same unorthodox thinking that it employed to
defeat Lee. Most famously, move 37 of the AI’s second game involved a tile
placement almost unheard-of in top tier Go, and which Go strategists still talk
A DeepMind spokesperson said: “One of the most exciting aspects of our match
against Lee Sedol was the discovery of new creative strategies. This second
event has been specifically designed to see what more new secrets can be
unearthed, including through collaborative formats like Pair Go and Team Go.”
Alongside the matches, taking place in late May in Wuzhen, China, DeepMind will
host a conference to “explore how AlphaGo has created new knowledge about the
oldest of games, and how the technologies behind AlphaGo, machine learning, and
artificial intelligence, are bringing solutions to some of the world’s greatest
© 2017 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies.
